---
layout: post
title:  "I give up. No title."
date:   2020-06-06
---
A man asks the soap opera star he lives with, “Can’t you stop acting in that serial? At least that way, we’ll get some nutritious food.”

A woman is welcomed into a weight loss programme with, “You’ll have a lot of suitors once you lose some weight.”

Apparently, when people say such things in movies, I clench up physically to brace for the worst. And the worst is: nothing happens, everything goes on as usual, that was just friendly conversation. I only observed this bodily reaction recently, when a film foiled my expectations and something did happen. The soap opera star scoffed at the idea that a young man might need her to feed him, the other woman pointedly clarified that her motive for losing weight was quite different.

I adored the movie. *Varane Avashyamund* (dir. Anoop Sathyan, Malayalam, 2020) felt like fried rice and a soft blanket rolled into one. I didn’t only appreciate it for calling out stuff said in bad spirit. This is the family entertainer of my dreams: K.P.A.C. Lalita is wonderfully droll as the soap opera star, there is a pet chicken called KFC, romance blossoms between two equally hesitant and middle-aged people and Dulquer Salmaan shows up at regular intervals. But while trying to articulate what I loved most about the movie, I kept circling back to this: that it seemed to frame each character with dignity and feeling, regardless of their gender or socio-economic class.

Is that all it takes, does my entire sensibility hinge on so low a bar? Just to be clear, the movie wasn’t straining to be politically correct, it came across as genuinely thoughtful. But I definitely savoured its humanity as much as I enjoyed the entertaining plot. Separately, at around the same time as I watched this film, a friend asked in what ways I might’ve been shaped by other people’s sexism. And then I heard someone ask in a podcast, “If the patriarchy were not a factor in my life, what would I be?” It seemed all at once that my entire personality has been moulded by indignation.

The idea was terrifying. I had to remind myself of things I genuinely enjoy, that I think I’d’ve enjoyed anyway if my world were perfect. That exercise was reassuring, but also illuminating, because it made me see that the joy I derive from defiance doesn't have to be less earnest or authentic than any other. Of course the person I am is inseparable from the world I’ve lived in — and while I will begrudge the universe any bitterness it might eventually sow in me, I don’t care very much to know who I’d’ve been if I lived in an utopia. 

Even so, I do wonder what that life would’ve been like, and *Varane Avashyamund* offers some delightful suggestions. As a disclaimer, annoying things do happen. Although the protagonists are all somewhat affluent, a group of working class men is conjured up for the hero to thrash in the lone action sequence. And when a woman says a man was upset to see her crying, in truth he only seems to have panicked and demanded that she stop sobbing. But also, in the Chennai this movie’s set in, male strangers and colleagues pay compliments in a wonderfully matter-of-fact way that flatters rather than frightens women. In the apartment complex where the protagonists live, household employees and building staff are not invisibilized or pitied, but portrayed as supporting characters with concerns of their own. 

Equally energizing are glimpses of how we could approach this alternate reality from where we’re currently at. One of the movie’s central conflicts does involve an expectation that mothers will be care-givers before they are anything else. But instead of romanticizing this notion, the situation explores a well-meaning child’s frustrations with this concept, and resolves itself without demanding the mandatory maternal sacrifice.

You’ve probably guessed what sort of movie I don’t like to watch. But I don’t always want to be watching the *Social Issue Dramas* Netflix offers me, either. When I am stressed or distressed and want to be comforted, my best bet is probably an Andrea Camilleri novel, whose Inspector Montalbano eats fresh seafood and swims in the sea and reveals his inner life in addition to solving crime. I’m almost one hundred percent relaxed when I’m reading these stories, but I do wince when the formulaic female characters inevitably appear: whiny girlfriend, suspicious wife, seductress. It’s disheartening.

Which is why I’m celebrating *Varane Avashyamund*’s (on Netflix, with English subtitles) addition to the fluffy movie rotation. The laughs come easy and aplenty. Shobhana’s wardrobe is a dream, her turn as a divorced mother in love utterly (I know every critic’s said this but there is literally no better word) graceful. That post-credits scene, pitch-perfect. Plus, next time, when K.P.A.C. Lalita’s soap star is asked to stop acting and start cooking, I’ll just lean back and watch her slash through that casual sexism.
